			Last revised 26-Jan-21

			  Questionnaire for

		  Harvard Extension School CSCI E-92
		   Principles of Operating Systems

			     Spring 2021


Name:	Ben Feuer			Home/Cellular phone number: 347-593-9876


E-mail:	penfever@hotmail.com			Work phone number:


Where are you located? 
Sunny New Jersey 

What is your time zone? 
GMT-5, Eastern standard time


What pronouns would you like us to use when referring to you? 
He/His/Him


If it's necessary for us to meet on-line using an app other than Zoom,
what is your Google Hangouts name and/or your Skype name?  And, which
do you prefer to use? 
I haven't used Google Hangourts before, so I would have to create one. My Skype handle is penfever.


Occupation (If an undergraduate student, please specify your major and
year and at which school; If a graduate student, please specify your
department, field, and year and at which school).
I currently teach Film History and Screenwriting at Ramapo College and Montclair State University, respectively, and I run a small writing consultancy for high-level creatives. That said, I am planning to go back to school for a Masters in Computer Science in the summer.


Have you taken:
  CSCI E-10a (Formerly CSCI E-50a) (Introduction to Computer Science
      Using Java I),
  CSCI E-10b (Formerly CSCI E-50b) (Introduction to Computer Science
      Using Java II),
  CSCI E-22 (Formerly CSCI E-119) (Data Structures),
  CSCI E-26 (Introduction to C, Unix/Linux Programming, and Web Interfaces),
  CSCI E-28 (Formerly CSCI E-215) (Unix/Linux Systems Programming),
  CSCI E-50 (Formerly CSCI E-52) (Intensive Introduction to Computer
      Science),
  CSCI E-53 (Effective C++ for Programmers),
  CSCI E-61 (Systems Programming and Machine Organization),
  CSCI E-124 (Data Structures and Algorithms),

  or equivalents?  Please specify which?

  I have taken CSCI E-50 on Edx. I have taken two NYU courses in Data Structures, basic and advanced -- the courses were in C++.

If you have not taken CSCI E-22 (Formerly CSCI E-119) (Data Structures),
how do you meet the prerequisite?

To be completely honest, I'm not certain that I do. I did take Data Structures, but I don't know if it covered the same territory. I would appreciate the opportunity to discuss this with someone after you've had a chance to review my work.

Are you currently working toward a degree in a degree program?  If so,
at what institution, which program, and what degree?

See above.

Concurrently with taking this class, are you working full time?  Part time?

Part-time (teaching).

Are you taking any other classes concurrently with this one?

I am taking three other classes concurrently with this one;
Microeconomics and Statistics at U.Pittsburgh
Discrete Mathematics at Harvard Extension

Do you have experience implementing many different data structures
from scratch?  If yes, please describe.  If not, how do you meet the
prerequisite?

I have implemented a variety of data structures from scratch at least once or twice. None more than three times.
I'm pretty sure CS50 had us do a hash table in C for one assignment, although it was awhile ago. 
My NYU courses focused on stacks, queues, linked lists and trees. 
I have implemented quicksort, merge sort, selection sort and various simple searches and traversals, nothing fancy.

Do you have experience using Unix?  Do you have experience programming
using Posix/Linux/Unix system calls?  If yes, please describe.

I have dabbled in Unix. I know grep and ls and what a pipe is, I understand the basic directory structure.

Have you already ordered and/or received the NXP/Freescale K70
development modules TWR-K70F120M-KIT (which includes TWR-K70F120M,
TWR-SER, TWR-ELEV)?  Note: If the TWR-K70F120M-KIT is not available,
the individual components should be ordered.

I ordered the necessary components on eBay second-hand, so as not to disrupt internationals trying to order them, as you requested.

What additional appropriate course or work experience do you have?

I've done maybe a hundred little coding challenges here and there, and a few research projects for myself and for friends, all using the Numpy/Pandas/Scipy/Jupyter stack.

What is your math background?

At the college level, through Calculus I. I'm taking Discrete Mathematics now.

What computer languages do you know (please include assembler and
high-level languages)?  Have you programmed in the C Programming
Language, C++, or Java?

I have done a bit of C in CS50, and a bit of Java for coding challenges. The bulk of my code has been Python or C++.

What operating systems have you used (e.g. Windows, Mac OS, Linux,
iOS, Android, etc.)?

All of the above, but I'm most fluent with Windows.

What computers have you used (i.e., which machine language instruction
sets)?

I have not written machine language before.

What is your motivation for taking this course?

To challenge myself and push my limits.

Other comments:

I have already read the first 250 pages of the Operating Systems textbook, and I'm also taking additional notes on C. But I've only been coding for about a year, and not full time, either. I'm aware I have some catching up to do. I'm also aware there are limits to how fast things can go. As a point of reference, it took me ~6.5 hrs to write the word-count program.
This course seems like a lot of fun, and I would love to take it, but I'm sure I'll need help at times, and I don't want to place an undue burden on Stephen and Mark (or on myself!). So I'm relying on your judgment. Please let me know how you'd like me to proceed, or feel free to call my cell if you want more information. 

Regards,
Ben